LOUISVILLE, Ky. — A few unflattering reviews are to be expected with any hotel, particularly one whose rates start at $49 per night. But while complaints about shabby rooms and thin towels are common in the industry, ones like these, from TripAdvisor.com, are not: “It is a clean hotel but there are a lot of homeless people there.” “Run far far away!!!!! This is a homeless shelter, not a hotel!” “DO NOT STAY HERE UNLESS YOU ARE HOMELESS… All of the workers are former addicts/homeless people.” Hotel Louisville, 12 stories of brick adorned with a large white cross, is indeed a hotel and event space open to the public. At the same time, it is a transitional-housing facility, substance-abuse recovery center and job-training site owned and operated by Wayside Christian Mission, a nonprofit that shelters and feeds the city’s homeless population. Wayside bought the building at a foreclosure auction in 2009, never intending to rent rooms to the general public. It was simply a place to house the homeless. But as expenses mounted and travelers came through the lobby, remembering what used to be a Holiday Inn and seeking a place to stay, Wayside began to make use of its empty rooms. Four years later, Hotel Louisville is in many ways an improbable success, serving addicts and the homeless while turning a profit from hotel guests and banquets, even during the recession. Perhaps the nation’s only such hybrid, it defies the usual categories — homeless shelter and charity; hotel and for-profit enterprise — and reflects a growing embrace of commerce by social-services groups normally funded by government and foundation grants. Yet Wayside’s pivot from a traditional model of charity toward the seductions of business tells its own complicated tale, showing just how hard it is to do good.

Not In My Backyard

The lobby of Hotel Louisville Pat McDonogh for Al Jazeera America Every homeless shelter has a NIMBY problem. Try building a new facility or renovating an old one and the neighbors come out of the woodwork to protest each additional bed. But the battle waged against Hotel Louisville was unusual even in the long history of Wayside Christian Mission, founded in 1957. The saga began six years ago, after the group finally raised enough money to replace its worn-out transitional-housing facility for women and kids. Initially, the married couple at Wayside’s helm — Tim Moseley, a bearded, heavyset minister, and his wife, Nina, an attorney with waist-length platinum blonde hair — intended to build on property it already owned along gentrifying Market Street. Real-estate developers with city-hall ties killed the plan, claiming the need for “historic preservation,” and forced Wayside to sell its Market Street building. The Moseleys then tried to buy a former school, but that effort was blocked by irate neighbors and a zoning decision effectively prohibiting new homeless shelters in the city. The ban was later declared unlawful by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Then, in early 2009, the Moseleys heard that the downtown Holiday Inn, nicknamed “Hotel Louisville,” would be sold at a foreclosure auction. The final price tag of $10 million depleted all the funds Wayside had raised through its years-long capital campaign and proceeds from the Market Street sale, but at 187 rooms and 169,400 square feet, the building could house hundreds. Eighty-three homeless women moved into the hotel in November. Shortly thereafter, with utility costs mounting and many floors vacant, the Moseleys saw an opportunity. “People kept coming through and asking for a room,” Nina Moseley recalled. So Wayside opened Hotel Louisville to the public while continuing to provide shelter and substance-abuse recovery services to women in need, free of charge.

Home at a hotel

The hotel’s high-ceilinged lobby resembles that of a ski resort, with an elaborate chandelier, a grand piano and extensive wood paneling. It’s a busy crossroads of guests and long-term residents — plus thrifty diners lured by the $5 soul food-buffet in the adjacent restaurant. I first visited Hotel Louisville in June and recently returned for a five-day stay. After checking in at the front desk, I took a well-worn elevator to my room on the ninth floor, one of five levels open to the general public. It was a standard, budget-rate hotel room: clean and air-conditioned, with a TV and small desk free of flourish.

Cassie Lintz settles down for the night with her daughters Kendal, age 4, and Chloe, age 6, on right. Pat McDonogh for Al Jazeera America I’d soon learn that the residents’ quarters, on floors four, five, six and eleven, are homey and personalized, more like tiny apartments than hotel rooms sanitized with Smells BeGone. To date, between 96 and 162 people at a time — mostly women in recovery, but also some children and a few men — have lived in the hotel. Cassie Lintz and her daughters, preschooler Kendal and first-grader Chloe, know the place better than most. Several months ago, they moved in for a second time. “I had almost two years clean when I relapsed. So I came back here to do this again and get back on track,” Lintz said of her struggle with prescription painkillers.

She and the two round-faced, sandy-haired girls were sharing a room on the hotel’s family floor, home to several mostly single-parent units. Generally, substance-abuse centers require parents to come alone, leaving their children behind. Hotel Louisville is a rarity even among family-based recovery programs, giving clients with children a free, private room, with child care and activities included. Upstairs, on one of the singles floors, Yolanda Thomas wore her reading glasses to study the Bible in bed. She’d arrived at Hotel Louisville in July, having slept off her last high on a bus from Virginia. She was living in a tidy double with another “girl in the program,” splitting a bathroom, nightstand, TV and table. Thomas’s shoes — including several pairs of pointy high heels she has little occasion to wear — were lined up along the wall.

Recovering through work?

At early-morning meditation on a recent Friday, Thomas and about two dozen other women — in varying degrees of wakefulness, young and old, white and African-American — sat in a circle of chairs in the first-floor chapel. Everyone clutched a Bible and The Big Book from Alcoholics Anonymous. A few brought young children, who played in the back or snoozed in their strollers. (The day care wasn’t yet open.) Hotel manager Virginia Taylor, or “Miss V,” entered the room around 8 a.m. Short and stocky with freckled brown skin and oiled hair, she’s a former addict with 22 years clean and nearly as much peer-counseling experience. Taylor oversees Wayside’s recovery program and leads the gospel choir. In a thick Southern accent full of tapering R’s, she speaks with the air of a preacher or prison warden. “The disease does not promise you it’ll be easy. But you have a daily choice to stay sober. Choose to live,” she said. Taylor led the community meeting, a chance for residents to express grievances with the facility and with one another. Women clapped for every submission of “consequences” — 10,000-word reflections written on handfuls of notebook paper — the punishment for minor infractions, like missing a work shift or neglecting to sign out. The meeting concluded with a collective Lord’s Prayer, and the women then split up for work. Work therapy — performing housekeeping, food service, security and laundry for public hotel guests — is a key component of Wayside’s recovery program.

Recovery Manager Virginia Taylor, a former addict, leads early-morning meditation, part of the substance-abuse curriculum at Hotel Louisville. Pat McDonogh for Al Jazeera America “Many of these ladies didn’t know anything about housekeeping, but here, once you get to second phase (of recovery), they can choose to go to another hotel and get a job,” Cheri Hartwill, a recovering addict who leads the cleaning team, explained. “It prepares you — your work ethic, how you treat people — because a lot of us come from the streets.” Since the work is part of their recovery, and because lodging, food and other basic needs are provided free of charge, hotel residents are given an hourly “gift” of 50 cents to $1.50 per hour in lieu of pay. Residents sign “contracts acknowledging that they’re not employees or workers, but trainees,” said Wayside Chief Operating Officer Nina Moseley. The work assignments at Hotel Louisville are a more elaborate version of what Wayside and other charities have always asked of their residents. Since long before the hotel opened, Wayside has operated two donation-based Louisville thrift stores, with revenues supporting the organization’s central work. It based this model on that of larger groups like Goodwill and the Salvation Army, which require “beneficiaries” to unload, sort, stock and inventory donated goods in vast warehouses and shops. But Hotel Louisville residents are split on the value of work therapy. “It’s part of my penance,” Kim, a former nurse, said of her time in the hotel laundry room. Before coming to Wayside in September, she’d lost her home and car and had to sleep on the porch of an abandoned house. Others in the program say that their long hours and the strenuous nature of work therapy sometimes make it difficult to attend meetings and classes. One resident, who asked to remain anonymous, called these work assignments "unpaid labor," plain and simple. “This isn’t training. This is a business,” she said. “These are actual jobs you’re performing. You’re not doing it to strengthen yourself for a job outside. This is a job inside.” Karen Garnett, district director of the federal Department of Labor in Louisville, questions whether Hotel Louisville’s work-therapy program complies with U.S. labor laws. In some cases, such “trainees” are in fact employees entitled to the minimum wage and overtime, she said. “For the part of the hotel that’s a business entity, there may be some part that could be considered training, but it takes a minimum amount of training for some of this work.”
